thank you very much humans have been on
the earth for about 200,000 years and
the generation that's coming of age
today is in a position that's unique
whether uniquely privileged or uniquely
unlucky has yet to be determined but
that it's unique is very clear for the
first time in human history it's
necessary to make a crucial decision
will organized human life continue to
exist on this earth or will it not and
that's not in the indefinite future it's
a near future the significance of this
question can cannot be overemphasized
there are two imminent threats to decent
human survival and there are others that
are lurking not too far behind one of
these threats can be very easily dated
August 6 1945
that's the date on which we learned that
human intelligence had devised the means
to destroy ourselves
it was never seriously in doubt that the
capacity to destroy would escalate and
that it would diffuse too many hands
sharply raising the threat of self
annihilation in the years that followed
the record of near misses is appalling
sometimes from accident and error a few
shocking cases from recklessness if not
worse and today the threat is growing in
both categories escape from catastrophe
for seventy years is a near miracle
such miracles cannot be trusted to
perpetuate on that fateful day in 1945
which personally I remember very well
humanity entered into a new era the
nuclear age an era that is unlikely to
last very long either
we will soon bring it to an end or it is
likely to bring us to an end I'm not
going to take the time to run through
the record here but it is indeed
appalling and new information is
constantly being unearthed actually one
of the most serious incidents was in
1983 it turns out to have been a very
close call and very relevant to current
concerns we have just very recently
learned more about it thanks to many
years of efforts by the National
Security Archive to obtain access to
classified documents recently succeeded
the new revelations have to do with the
nuclear command exercise called Abel
Archer in 1983 in an effort to probe
Russian defenses the Reagan
administration launched operations
simulating an attack on Russia reading
leading right up to a pretend nuclear
attack simulated launch of nuclear
weapons this happened to be at a moment
of extreme international tension pursing
two missiles with flight time of a few
minutes to Moscow had just been emplaced
in Western Europe and there were other
threat escalations a few years ago when
Russian archives were Declassified it
was learned not to surprisingly that the
Russians had taken this pretty seriously
there has been uncertainty however about
what was understood in Washington and
the new evidence that's just been
released reveals that Washington
recognized right away that Abel Archer
I'm now quoting may have inadvertently
placed our relations with the Soviet
Union on a hair-trigger that was the
judgment of a presidential Advisory
Board on the time at the time meaning
that Washington recognized that we were
at the verge of terminal nuclear war
furthermore we have now learned US
intelligence determined that the
Russians were mobilizing forces quoting
again to an unusual level of alert which
according to protocol means that the US
should have reacted in kind leading the
disaster turns out that one Air Force
officer man named Leonard
Perutz decided on his own not to follow
prescribed procedures but to do nothing
perhaps averting terminal war we already
knew that shortly after this Russian
automated systems detected a u.s.
nuclear attack and the officer in charge
stanislav petrov also decided to do
nothing instead of transmitting the
information to a higher level possibly
triggering a massive nuclear strike any
nuclear strike means termination the
record reveals many such frightening
episodes not to speak of shocking
reckless recklessness and adventurism
which to make it worse is often
applauded in sober commentary I'll
return soon to the current growing
threat the second imminent threat is
global warming and the same date the end
of World War two
is again of critical significance for
some time as you probably know
geologists have recognized that the
earth is entering into a new geological
era called the Anthropocene an era
that's defined by extreme human impact
on the environment there has been
disagreement about just what changes
became so extreme as to signal the onset
of this new era and a few months ago the
official working group on the
Anthropocene recommended to the
International geological Congress that
the dawn of the Anthropocene should be
given the same date the end of world war
two so according to their analysis the
Anthropocene and the nuclear age
coincide opposing a dual threat to the
survival of organized human life the
report of the working group on the
Anthropocene discusses the sharp
acceleration of extinction rates of
animals and plants and they weren't
warned that the earth is on course to
see 75% of species become extinct in the
next few centuries if current trends
continue and they also confirm the
conclusion of other scientists that
climate warming co2 is increasing in the
atmosphere at the fastest rate for 66
million years and furthermore that
fossil fuel use is pushing levels from
280 particles of co2 per million ppm
before the Industrial Revolution to over
400 ppm last July new record and it's
rising at a rate unprecedented in the
geological record the 400 ppm is a
significant number that comes perilously
close to the estimated level of
stability of the huge Antarctic Ice
Sheet which is estimated about 450 ppm
and it's understood that the collapse of
the ice sheet would have catastrophic
consequences for sea level rise these
are processes already underway
predominantly in the Arctic regions
regions and the broader picture is no
less ominous practically every month
breaks new temperature records a huge
droughts of a threatening survival for
hundreds of millions of people
there are also factors in some of the
most horrendous conflicts Syria today
Darfur long ago again I won't take time
to review the record but it should be
deeply alarming to anyone with eyes open
it's widely recognized that we have
entered the period of the sixth mass
extinction the fifth extinction 66
million years ago is attributed to a
huge asteroid that hit the earth
destroying 75% of the species on earth
ending the age of the dinosaurs opening
the way for the rise of small mammals
ultimately humans about 200,000 years
ago and it's taken us only a few hundred
years to bring about the sixth
extinction which is interestingly
different from the earlier ones so
recent studies show in quite instructive
ways in the earlier mass extinctions
body size was not correlated with
extinction but in the human generated
sixth extinction which is now underway a
researchers report on now quoting an
extreme bias against large bodied
animals that distinguishes
the modern diversity crisis from all
deep time analogs which means in short
that we're mainly killing larger animals
and that's a record that goes back to
protohumans million years ago from the
beginning of predatory species that
cause significant harm to large
organisms now approaching truly lethal
scale with ourselves not far in the
distance the human capacity to destroy
one another on a massive scale has not
been in doubt for a long time with a
hideous peak in the past century what's
happening now brings to mind phrase made
famous by Thomas Hobbes man is a wolf to
his fellow man and it also make brings
to mind the bitter rejoinder by Joseph
de Maistre that the comment is unfair to
wolves who only kill for survival unlike
us in thinking about the risks to
survival it's important to focus
attention on the United States
particularly so for for us for American
citizens that one reason is elementary
moral principle it's what we hope to
shape an influence that must be primary
concern which means those policies that
are within reach within our reach
typically policies of our own
institutions state and private so we can
deplore the building of coal plants in
India but we can't do much about it
directly at least but we can do a lot
about building coal plants in the United
States and in fact a very clear choice
about that extremely significant matter
is arising in a few weeks when we have
to choose between a presidential
candidate who's committed to
phasing out this highly destructive
practice and another candidate who calls
for accelerating the race to destruction
and there are other reasons for focusing
on the United States the reasons that
hold for everyone in the world a very
simply us power and the global system is
enormous without any historical
comparison that was clearly true in 1945
the date of the inception of these dual
threats to survival at that time the US
had about 50% of total world wealth
other industrial societies had been
devastated by the war of the US economy
again de normally from the war virtually
quadrupling industrial production
setting the stage for rapid post-war
growth the US had been by far the
richest country in the world for a
century but prior to World War two it
was not the major player in world
affairs that was a role held primarily
by England secondarily France of course
all of that changed radically during the
Second World War the France declined
sharply as a world power and the British
ruefully recognized that they could only
hope to be a junior partner in the
system of world order managed in
Washington quoting the British Foreign
Office British officials had ample
historical experience of their own and
accordingly they had few illusions about
what was happening and their
descriptions are telling they recognized
in their words and quoting high British
officials that the economic imperialism
of American business interests is
attempting to elbow us out under the
cloak
a benevolent and avuncular
internationalism Americans believe that
the United States stands for something
in the world something of which the
world has need something which the world
is going to like something in the final
analysis which the world is going to
take whether it or not he was
articulating the real-world version of
what scholarship calls wilsonian
idealism the version that conforms to
the historical and internal record well
naturally this position of global
dominance post-war position that
couldn't be maintained entirely other
industrial countries reconstructed
decolonization proceeded on it's often
agonizing course leading to a more
diverse international system but which
the United States still uniquely
powerful so by 1970 US share of global
wealth had declined to about 25 percent
still colossal but not 50 percent and it
remains roughly there these observations
are fairly familiar but they're also
somewhat misleading and the reason is
because of the way that the
globalization of the world economy has
proceeded in the recent decades
particularly revealing in this
connection is quite important work by
Sean Stars is the first political
economist to have closely investigated a
very important topic corporate ownership
of the world's wealth and it's becoming
a more realistic measure of global power
than national wealth in the neoliberal
globalized world of the last few decades
it's no longer a world of nationally
discrete political economies and the
results of investigations are quite
dramatic
so it turns out that in virtually every
sector US corporations are well in the
lead in ownership of the International
economy and overall their ownership is
not far below 50% about what US national
wealth was in nice so one good
illustration that he gives is iPhones
everyone has one these are assembled in
China by two Taiwanese firms the major
one doughnuts Foxconn these two firms
are intern subcontractors for Apple
Foxconn is profit in 2014 was 4.3
billion dollars while apples was ten
times larger forty four point five
billion and China's share the profit was
tiny even though it's the exporter of
iPhones it adds very little value to the
product and they're similar measures
across the international economy
multinational corporations are
nationally based they rely on the nation
state ultimately the citizens of the
nation-state for protection and
sustenance in fact for their existence
and in the current globalized world of
US dominance of the global economy is in
important respects not very different
from what it was at the peak historical
peak of 1945 in the military dimension
of course the United States is entirely
without parallel spends almost as much
as the rest of the world combined it's
technologically far more advanced
military bases all over the world and
military operations of one sort or
another in great many countries and no
one else's even playing that game it's
unique for reasons such as these the
importance of focus on US policies
should be quite
clear the military dimension leads us to
the growing threat of nuclear war it's
primarily at the Russian border there's
a secondary threat off the coast of
China it's concerning control of the
South China Sea and contested islands
and it's important to bear in mind that
the threats are not at the Mexican
border or off the coasts of California
and Florida that's again a reflection of
global power at the Russian border the
most dangerous situation both NATO and
Russia are sharply increasing their
military forces and also carrying out
highly adventurist
confrontational tactics which are
extremely hazardous so there are close
encounters of military jet planes
sometimes the feet apart NATO military
exercises are taking place within a
couple hundred yards of the Russian
border and there are many other highly
provocative acts which can blow up by
accident meanwhile both sides are
expanding their military Arsenal's on
the US side one significant element is
Obama's plan for a trillion dollar
upgrading of the nuclear weapon system
that includes new nuclear weapons that
are recognized by strategic analysts to
be particularly dangerous the reason is
that they can be scaled down to tactical
battlefield use that offers temptations
at times of conflict that could quickly
escalate the full-scale nuclear war
terminal disaster also highly
provocative is the $800 million eight
hundred million dollar missile defense
system that Washington recently
installed in Romania allegedly in
defense
against non-existent Iranian nuclear
missiles it's recognized on all sides
that what's called missile defense
insofar as it works at all is actually
an offensive weapon it's part of an
offensive military system it could never
stop a serious first strike but it's
conceivable that it might impede a
retaliatory strike which makes it a
first strike weapon of course hence the
Romanian installation is highly
threatening to Russia
the threat of war at the Russian border
is in significant part an outgrowth of
NATO expansion since the collapse of the
Soviet Union twenty-five years ago
that's during the administration of the
first President Bush and his Secretary
of State James Baker and in Russia
Mikhail Gorbachev and what happened at
that time is highly instructive if you
look at it closely Gorbachev and Baker
Bush Baker had conflicting VIS visions
of the world order that should arise
with the disappearance of the Soviet
Union so Gorbachev called for
dismantling of all military alliances to
be replaced by a new unified Eurasian
security system which would integrate
Soviet Union former Soviet Union and
Western Europe Bush and Baker had a
different plan and NATO would expand
while the Soviet system collapsed the
issue was joined right away over the
most crucial question the fate of
Germany the Gorbachev agreed the German
unification even German exception to
NATO which is a pretty remarkable
concession in the light of recent
history but there was a quid pro quo
NATO would not extend
into the east that was the phrase that
was used in the negotiations meaning
East Germany expansion beyond that was
not contemplated Bush and Baker agreed
to this compromise but only verbally it
was a gentlemen's agreement a handshake
not in writing NATO at once expanded to
East Germany but as Bush and Baker
correctly stated they were not violating
a written pledge just a gentlemen's
agreement there's a rich scholarly
literature trying to determine just what
happened in those days and very recent
publication which provides quite a
surprising and instructive resolution to
many of these questions it's an article
by Joshua it's cool it's different sin'
in the prestigious journal international
security a couple of months ago he
carried out an extensive study of
previously ignored archives and it
reveals quite persuasively that the bush
baker verbal commitments to Gorbachev
were explicitly designed to mislead
Gorbachev while US dominance extended to
the east and it's quite an important
discovery that was only the first step
under Clinton NATO expanded further to
the east in 2008 and again in 2013 this
is under Obama NATO went so far as to
offer membership in NATO to Ukraine
that's the Russian geopolitical
heartland long historical cultural
relationships with Russia a highly
provocative move which had many
consequences George Kennan other senior
statesmen had warned early on that NATO
enlargement would be as they put it a
tragic mistake
policy error of historic proportions
it's now leading to rising tensions on
the Russian border which is the
traditional invasion route through which
Russia was virtually destroyed twice in
the past century by Germany alone not
just Germany as part of a huge military
alliance led by the most powerful state
in world history the risk of terminal
nuclear war is not slight reflecting on
these matters the European historian
Richard sacra writes accurately enough
that NATO's mission today is to manage
the risks created by its existence
that's worth thinking about meanwhile
NATO's official mission has been
extended well beyond the official
mission to control the global energy
system pipelines and sea lanes and
unofficially to serve as an intervention
force under US command as we've seen
long forgotten and apparently intended
only to mislead or the promises made by
George Bush and James Baker to Gorbachev
that NATO would become a bore political
alliance in return for Gorbachev's
agreement to allow German unification
within NATO which again was a remarkable
concession in the light of history well
the fate of NATO since the end of the
Cold War is quite revealing shines a
bright light on the real nature of the
Cold War and its doctrinal basis so NATO
of course had been presented all along
as necessary to hold off the Russian
hordes 1991 no more Russian whores so
what happened did NATO disappear
no it expanded the manner that I
described that provides no slight
insight into operative policies in the
years before what it reveals which is
pretty clear had in fact not passed
entirely unnoticed in mainstream
scholarship so a decade earlier in 1981
Harvard professor government adviser
Samuel Huntington had observed that his
words you may have to sell intervention
or other military action in such a way
as to create the misimpression that it
is the Soviet Union you're fighting
that's what the United States has done
ever since the Truman Doctrine in 1947
which is a pretty accurate description
of what actually happened during the
Cold War and when the Berlin Wall fell
in 1989 pursuing the same logic
Huntington warned his words that
Gorbachev public relations can be as
much a threat to American interests in
Europe as we're Brezhnev's tanks and the
threat of Gorbachev's
peace offers was overcome in the manner
just reviewed and we're now facing the
consequences the mounting threat of war
particularly on the Russian border has
elicited considerable alarm in national
security circles not discussed much but
in those circles they're watching one
highly respected analyst who has had
long experience at the nuclear brink as
he describes it warns that his words
we're facing nuclear dangers today that
are in fact more likely to erupt into a
nuclear conflict than during the Cold
War
that's former defense secretary we
in Perry recently and he's far from
alone every year a group of experts
organized by the Bulletin of Atomic
Scientists to update the Doomsday Clock
that they established in 1947 at the
dawn of the nuclear age midnight means
terminal disaster and the question is
how close is the and the midnight that
two years ago they moved the clock to
minutes closer to midnight to three
minutes to midnight where it remains
that's the closest it's been committed
since the able Archer war scare of the
early 1980s which was quite severe we
now know and explaining that decision
they invoked the growing threat of
nuclear war thinking particularly of the
Russian border but they also added
something additional for the first time
the failure of governments to seriously
deal with the impending environmental
crisis and in both cases with good
reason well there have been some steps
to addressing the environmental crisis
the Paris agreement of last December
have finally gone into effect officially
the provisions are inadequate but
they're at least something and a basis
for going on it had been hoped that the
negotiations would lead to a verifiable
treaty but that goal was not attained
it's only a voluntary agreement
much weaker of course the reason for
this was clearly understood it was
actually reported in the press
though not prominently enough the reason
was very simple the Republican Congress
would not accept binding commitments so
there is no verifiable treaty only
something much weaker
a matter of no slight importance and
virtually no comment
it's actually an astonishing fact if you
think about it that a major political
organization in the most powerful
country in world history
is literally dedicated to destruction of
much of life on Earth now that might
seem to be an unfair comment but I don't
think it is right now we're in the midst
of the quadrennial electoral frenzy
think about the Republican primaries
which recently ended in the Republican
primaries every single candidate denied
the facts about climate change there was
one exception the guy who was supposed
to be the sensible moderate John Kasich
he conceded the facts but said we should
do nothing about it which is even worse
than denying them that's a hundred
percent the winning candidate calls for
more use of fossil fuels including coal
plants the most destructive he also
calls for dismantling regulations
refusing funds to developing societies
that are seeking to move to sustainable
energy and in every possible way
accelerating the race to disaster when
you consider the stakes it's a fair
question whether there has ever been a
more dangerous organization in history
than today's Republican Party I think
the answer is No
[Applause]
and worse still there is no commentary
on this right through the primary
campaign very little sense that
astonishing blindness as the lemmings
march to the precipice in fact extends
well beyond so in the past few years
there's been extensive and typically
euphoric coverage of the prospects for a
hundred years of energy independence
given new technology for exploiting
fossil fuels occasionally there's
comment on the local impact of fracking
but scarcely a comment if you can even
find one in fact and pointing out that
the euphoria amounts to an enthusiastic
call for the sixth extinction to swallow
us up at well similarly the growing
threat of nuclear disaster barely
elicits a mention the two most important
questions in human history on which the
fate of the species depends are
virtually missing from the extensive
commentary on choice of leader for the
most powerful country in world history
and we'll see how the matter is treated
in the spectacle that many of us will
endure in a few moments I think you can
predict it's hard to find words to
capture the enormity of this
extraordinary blindness in the case of
nuclear weapons we know how to overcome
the threat abolish them and that's not a
utopian dream it's not advocated just by
the war resisters League and I would
guess many of us here but it's also
advocated by mainstream establishment
figures for example Reagan's Secretary
of State George Shultz
former secretary despecialized on
nuclear weapons for many years Henry
Kissinger and William Perry they are in
fact the four signers of an op-ed in The
Wall Street Journal
calling for elimination total
elimination of this scourge another
highly respected nuclear security expert
Perce Blair has recently formed the new
organization called global zero which
calls for an international treaty to ban
nuclear weapons the International Court
of Justice in its historic advisory
opinion in 1996 on the legality of the
threat or use of nuclear weapons it came
quite close to this stand and sensible
concrete steps have been proposed to
this end which could be taken right away
and surely steps can be taken to reduce
the international tensions that are
provoking the threat instead of
escalating them that the threat of
global warming can be overcome
effectively is less clear though there
are very clear steps that can and must
be taken if there's to be any hope for
decent human survival and once again
decisions about these matters the most
important decisions in human history and
actions to implement these decisions
cannot be delayed
[Applause]
okay okay so before kickoff I think
we've got time for some questions so the
first question Nome
do you believe Edward Snowden deserves a
pardon why or why not
yeah I'm one of the signers of the
petition I think was instant initiated
by Atmos international the coaling
permanent to be pardoned I don't think
that goes far enough
he should not just be pardoned he should
be honored and maybe
[Applause]
maybe Washington should be pardoned
that's up to you but the question
shouldn't arise in the case of Snowden
who simply performed the actions of a
citizen who's concerned about his
country in the world he informed people
the citizens of the United States of
what their government is doing to them
just what a citizen ought to do so he
should be honored and we should be
asking whether the government should be
pardoned ok so next question how should
developed countries respond to the mass
migrations caused by war and climate
change well certainly not the way
they're doing and in fact what's called
the refugee crisis is in fact a moral
crisis in the West I mean there are
there are countries where there are
cases in history of refugee of migrant
crisis that are severe in fact we're
living in such a case the migrant crisis
from Europe eliminated or destroyed the
indigenous population that's a pretty
serious crisis that's the extreme case
of migrant crisis today there are
countries that are absorbing huge
numbers of refugees Lebanon poor country
as about 40% immigrant migrants refugees
Lebanon had nothing to do with
engendering the crisis but it's taking
the consequences
Jordan has a huge number of refugees so
does turkey the United States has
practically none Europe has a very
limited number a very small compared
with it's not only with its wealth but
also with its role in creating the
crises our
role in recent years is even greater so
on the one hand you have rich powerful
countries which have played a major role
in creating the crises and are now
groaning because maybe they'll have to
accept a tiny bit of the consequences I
have poor countries which had nothing to
do with the crisis which are absorbing
the refugees so that's a moral crisis
it's we have in the United States the
same crisis with regard to Central
America that people fleeing from Central
America are for the most part fleeing
from crimes that we committed and then
we tell Mexico to send them back and not
let them come near our border pretty
much as Europe does in the case of
Turkey this is not only true of the
migrants from East from Iraq Syria that
the Levant region but also from Africa
one effect of the U the destruction of
Libya initiated by France and England
with the u.s. leading from behind as
Obama put it has been not only to
destroy Libya but to vastly increase the
level of human the human disaster
catastrophe killings in Libya but also
opened a funnel for people fleeing from
Africa well Europe has a certain
relation to Africa over the past couple
of centuries don't have to review it now
Europe again groaning under the impact
of the flight of people from regions it
has devastated and this is not ancient
history it's recent current history so
take the richest country in Africa
potentially the richest country which
could have led Africa to become the
flourishing region Congo enormous wealth
it was a Belgian colony the treatment of
Congo by the Belgians was
horrendous even by the standards of
European imperialism which was horrible
enough was one of the worst cases in
1960 the Congo didn't achieve liberation
they had a political leader young
political leader very promising very
popular Patrice Lumumba what happened
the CIA
instantly targeted him for assassination
but they didn't make it
the Belgians managed to assassinate him
first through proxies and they didn't
take any chances so his body was cut up
in pieces and dissolved in sulfuric acid
I took care of Lumumba and the Congo
hoped for independence then the United
States and its allies supported a
murderous kleptomaniac
Mobutu as long as they could
won't go through the deccan rectus
what's left of the country right now the
last couple of years the worst
atrocities in the world are countering
out in the Congo in eastern Congo the
millions of people have been slaughtered
in the last couple of years
one reason for it is your cell phones
multinationals are hovering over the
warring militias to get the minerals
that are needed for high-tech equipment
like cell phones in the West
that's the Congo it's not ancient
history that extends over much of the
region so yes there's a migrant crisis
in Europe a moral crisis and one of
extreme danger to the world
I mean I'm old enough to remember what
it means when Austria and Germany have
political parties that are effectively
neo-nazi I can remember Hitler speeches
in 1936 37 and it's not a nice memory
and that's what's happening in reaction
to what's called the refugee crisis we
have our own variant of it which is
severe and vicious and again of course
coming up in the presidential campaign
okay so now we also have a question now
about Brazil I would like you to comment
about the coup in Brazil
well the what's happened in Brazil is
sometimes described as a coup usually a
soft coup it's not a military coup of
the kind that the US helped initiate and
back in 1964 the basis for it was left
by the was initiated by the Kennedy
administration it was carried out
shortly after the assassination
instituted the first neo Nazi style
national security state in the
hemisphere was later a plague that later
spread through most of the hemisphere
reaching Central America in the 1980s
that was the 1964 coup this one is not a
military coup like that it's a kind of a
quasi parliamentary coup it removed from
office practically the one political
figure who has not been implicated in
the corruption scandal in an effort to
enrich ourselves it's about the only one
free from those charges the people who
are voting to impeach or succeeded in
encoding to impeach ur almost all of
them are under severe at significant
charges of major corruption for their
own benefit so it's a soft coup in fact
the Supreme Court of Brazil itself
determined that the official charges
against Dilma Rousseff are not
legitimate charges but that the
impeachment went through nevertheless
the current government the temer
government is actually I should say much
of my information about this comes from
my wife Valeria's
Brazilian tells me what's happening in
the Brazilian newspapers the
the current government is instituting
extremely reactionary policies clearly
attempting to dismantle the progress and
achievements that were made by under the
PT the Workers Party in the past 15
years now they're guilty of plenty of
crimes they did some pretty awful things
but they did also carry out policies
which were pretty bent quite beneficial
to much of the population now being
reversed the new ku government if you
want to call it that is all white all
male and a diverse country and the
policies are pretty frightening of
course strongly supported by the United
States as part of an effort on the part
of the United States to reverse the
progressive developments that have taken
place in Latin America in the past 15
years and the I should say the left
elements in these countries have plenty
to answer for they did a lot of things
which are quite blameworthy totally
wrong but nothing justifies the sort of
coup that's taking place okay now we
have a question about education higher
education what do you and popular
education what do you recommend for
people who want to study at university
level but cannot afford it and do not
want to get tangled up in loans and debt
well what they ought to do I mean this
you know you can't answer the question
for an individual but we should be
answering it collectively so we should
be asking for exam
why is there why are there costs for
higher education why isn't it like
secondary education and again that's not
a strange question there's certainly no
economic basis for it if you look around
the world today the richest most
successful countries have free virtually
free higher education so Germany which
is the most successful of the modern
state capitalist
society's higher education is virtually
free Finland which comes out at the top
and almost all international
competitions free and so on across the
board you go to poor countries just go
south of the border to Mexico poorer
country quite a respectable higher
education system in their thoughts it's
very quite respectable high quality has
problems like very low salaries so the
faculty have to have second jobs but
that's because it's a very poor country
education is free take a look at our own
country in the 1940s and 1950s 50s and
60s the great growth period highest
growth period in American society higher
education was virtually free for a huge
number of people it was not free but
subsidized namely those beneficiaries of
the GI Bill people who never would have
gone to college were unable to do so for
good for themselves very good for the
country contributed to successful
economic growth even private colleges
like Ivy League colleges though they had
tuition it was extremely low I entered
the University of Pennsylvania in Ivy
League college in 1945 a tuition was
$100 that would be maybe $800 by today's
real value and you could easily get a
scholarship so it essentially free that
was a much poorer country then the US
today is far richer than it was in that
period I think if you think it through
that can't really be an economic reason
for this there are other reasons not
good reasons think what they might be
but I think an answer to the question an
individual is stuck you gotta that
person is stuck with what exists but as
part of a collective of that person is
not stuck they can be part of an effort
to reverse the programs of the past
policies of the past four years roughly
thirty forty years
which have led to the situation in which
young people are trapped for life with
debt that they cannot get rid of notice
that the Paul I'm sure you know this the
policies are set up so that you can't
declare bankruptcy like a business the
government can garnish your Social
Security you're trapped for life a
highly disciplinary measure incidentally
and I don't think there's any
justification for it like other things
individually you can't do much about it
collectively you could do quite a lot so
now now there's a question about your
view on artificial intelligence and that
the threat our hope that it presents
when anyone asks that question the first
thing that comes to mind is a famous
comment that was made by a great
biologist at MIT Jerry leptin in a
debate about artificial intelligence
back around 1960 and at the end of the
debate he conceded that artificial
intelligence was pretty interesting but
he said it was miss named should have
been called natural stupidity that's the
it's a bit unfair but not totally
there's a lot of hype about our
artificial intelligence and there are
some achievements like say Google
Translator achievement robotics can make
some achievements but it's doing very
little in from a scientific point of
view its achieving things from a kind of
an engineering point of view which is
okay nobody should be opposed to bigger
bulldozers if they work but we shouldn't
be mislead about the insight that it's
supposed to be providing into the nature
of intelligence it's not doing that it's
often some other direction so it's a
valuable pursuit which can be useful if
it does
insofar as it is part of science which
it is partially it's just ordinary
cognitive science an effort to try to
find the nature of intelligent behavior
using computer-based models as a
technique of research and find that it's
pretty close to the kind of work of all
my life myself but the the you should be
pretty cautious about evaluating the PR
that's associated with it which often
pretty often is quite remote from the
actual level of insight obtained by
these measures now there are also
threats of artificial intelligence
serious ones that's particularly true in
the weapon system if the weapon system
becomes automated we're in deep trouble
automated systems fail all the time any
of you who have computers are familiar
with this they cannot be made reliable
and if they're unless there are very
narrow controls plate controls they can
blow up actually I gave a couple of
cases when I was talking past cases of
we know the u.s. record is fairly open
the Russian record is probably much
worse we don't know but in the U in the
case of the United States there have
been literally hundreds of cases when
there were the autumn the the automated
detection systems that detect an alleged
missile attack just gave the wrong
answer misfire and often we were within
minutes of responding a human
intervention interceded and that's going
to be true pretty generally that's a
serious problem
so using AI and the weapon system is
something extremely dangerous as is the
weapon system itself in other areas and
the techniques can often be useful the
fear
the idea that say robotics are going to
displace working people and you know
will people be out of jobs with all
these smart machines around there's just
no evidence for that at all I mean if
you look around the country there's a
huge amount of work to be done take a
walk in any city you know they're all
falling apart plenty of things to be
done
education way underfunded research to
vastly more the vast needs all over the
place
there are plenty of idle hands there are
resources to use those idle hands to do
the necessary work but the system is so
corrupt that it can't put them together
that's the problem not the fear that
robots are going to displace us in fact
to the extent that dull boring work can
be taken over by automata that's
liberating trees people to do more
interesting things including having
leisure the United States has much less
leisure than comparable countries
nothing wrong with using leisure to
enrich your own lives and whatever way
you choose and there's certainly nothing
wrong with freeing people to do more
creative independent work and let the
robots do the boring and dangerous stuff
ok this is running into this we yeah
that's that's a few more what do you
think it's ok with me right we're in two
more questions is there ever a role for
a benevolent imperialism
it's kind of like asking whether there's
a role for a benevolent slave owner
probably I mean it's better to have a
benevolent slave owner than a slave
owner who's a murderers brutal vicious
thug but the concept is an oxymoron it
just can't happen what gives you hope
people like you that's the hope of the
future the futures in your hands there's
a lot that can be done despite all the
problems of the country it's actually a
much more civilized country than it was
50 years ago much more and all kinds of
ways the role of the right rights of
women for example all sorts of other
things that didn't come as a gift came
out of popular struggle often pretty
hard but it left a legacy to us we
benefit from it it kind of gives us a
plateau from which to go on plenty of
problems in fact the worst problems in
human history but they can be addressed
and people like you are in a position to
address them and that's where the hope
is
[Applause]
[Music]
okay